.\"SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Red Hat, Inc.
.\"SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.\" File Name macro definition plagiarized from bash.
.\"
.de FN
\fI\|\\$1\|\fP
..
.TH man 1 "19 January, 2017" "1.0" "vdsm-client man page"
.SH NAME
vdsm-client \- VDSM's command line interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "vdsm-client [-a HOST] [-p PORT] [--insecure] [--timeout TIMEOUT] [-f FILE] namespace method [args]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B vdsm-client
is a command-line client to vdsmd(8) API.
It is intended to assist testing and debugging of the
oVirt suite.

.SS  Invoking commands with simple parameters
simple command parameters should have pattern of name1=value name2=value

.nf
    vdsm-client VM getStats vmID=b3f6fa00-b315-4ad4-8108-f73da817b5c5
.fi

will print stats of a VM by its ID.

.SS Invoking commands with complex parameters
For invoking commands with complex or many arguments, you can read a JSON dictionary
from a file:

.nf
    vdsm-client -f lease.json Lease info
.fi

where lease.json file content is:

.nf
    {
        "lease": {
            "sd_id": "75ab40e3-06b1-4a54-a825-2df7a40b93b2",
            "lease_id": "b3f6fa00-b315-4ad4-8108-f73da817b5c5"
        }
    }
.fi

.SS Reading from standard input
It is also possible to read parameters from standard input, creating complex
parameters interactively

.nf
cat <<EOF | vdsm-client -f - Lease info
{
"lease": {
        "sd_id": "75ab40e3-06b1-4a54-a825-2df7a40b93b2",
        "lease_id": "b3f6fa00-b315-4ad4-8108-f73da817b5c5"
}
}
EOF
.fi

.SH WARNING
.BR vdsm-client
is a debug tool, which is capable of harming the operation of a
single oVirt node and even a complete oVirt cluster. Its use is not supported or
endorsed.

.SH OPTIONS
.PD 0
.TP
.B -h
Display vdsm-client's help
.TP
.B --insecure
Connect to server in an insecure manner.
.TP
.B --timeout TIMEOUT
Change the method timeout. Default value is 60 seconds.
.TP
.B -f --file FILE
Provide a file that contains method parameters in JSON format.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vdsmd(8)

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to <http://bugzilla.redhat.com>

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2017 Red Hat, Inc. License GPLv2: GNU GPL Version 2 <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
